Welcome to The Test Set. Here we talk with some of the brightest thinkers and tinkerers
in statistical analysis, scientific computing, and machine learning. Digging into what makes
them tick, plus the insights, experiments, and OMG moments that shape the field.
In this episode, we interview Vincent Warmerdam, first full-time hire at Marimo, founder of
CalmCode.io, which has some really nice tech tutorials, and someone who seems to be a man
of many talents.
Vincent claims pursuing side activities, rather than doubling down on tech, are the
killer feature of his career, and I honestly can't agree more. He started out bartending
at a comedy theater, later he practiced jokes at his other job as a tour guide, finally
he landed a job at the tech company Spacey by delivering a well-timed joke in a bar at
a conference.
And this brings us to the meat of the conversation, Marimo notebooks and data analysis. At a time
when AI can generate entire notebooks in seconds, Vincent argues for the opposite approach.
Create with AI a notebook with a few cells filled out, and then just stare at a chart
for a couple minutes. Ultimately, get involved, and be selfish in wanting to understand the
data yourself.
So with that, Vincent Warmerdam.
Vincent, thanks for coming on the test set.
Yeah, where do we begin? I mean, I feel like you have such a broad set of things from your
like open source contributions to CalmCoder. Maybe you could just catch us up on, just
give us a broad swath of sort of the range of things you've been up to.
Sure. I mean, one thing it's CalmCode.io, it's not CalmCoder, but no worries, no worries,
there's a bit of a detail. Now I guess like, because I get the question a lot, because
it is true that I've done like a bunch of things, but the way that I see it is I'm kind
of open in the sense that I like to expose myself to things that just seem interesting,
and then you end up doing stuff. And as long as you document it properly and like share
it with people the right way, then you'll be known for things. So one thing that just
happened with, let's say the open source thing, my most downloaded package right now,
I think is scikit-lego. It's been downloaded almost 2 million times now. But it was just
me playing around with scikit-learn and sort of thinking like, you know, there's a bunch
of stuff missing in scikit-learn. Whenever I go to a different client, there's like this
one component that I always end up reusing, because it didn't have pandas support back
in the day. So I had a couple of components of the pandas thing, and I had a couple of
components that the group by thing. And there were a bunch of these tricks that I had in
my pocket, but I kind of felt that contributing those upstream to scikit-learn was way harder
than coming up with a little package that just shared the idea. But then it turned out
people started running it in production for realties. And like scikit-lego was kind of
a cool name, so it stuck in people's memory. And then I did a conference talk about it,
became more and more popular, we got contributors, etc. That was kind of the thing that happened
by accident, but I was curious. I have tons of open source projects that went nowhere,
just to be clear. But this was one that just happened to stick around. And then you become
known as the guy who did a good talk on scikit-lego and do more things, do more things. But just
like with the keyboards, just like with the YouTube, just like with the career path, it
is really just, I show up, I do things, I blog about it, make sure it's logged, and
people remember me. That's the trick. Nothing planned, it just happens if you expose yourself
and if you try to be a bit memorable about it. It's so interesting. I mean, I think
kind of researching your work for this, this is the most rabbit holes I think I've ever
gone down and just been intrigued with kind of like everyone. Yeah, it's interesting to
hear about like scikit-lego. And I know you were also at like Probable and Explosion,
which are really like open source kind of driven companies.
That might need an explainer too. So what happened there? I was at this consultancy
that shall not be named because I'm still recovering. But I was attending, if I had
that consultancy, this conference in Berlin. It was called Spacey in Real Life. I think
it was like 2018, maybe 2019. I kind of forget. But I went there because I thought, you know,
I want to learn more about these text embeddings. Something's happening there, and I don't
understand it. Kind of feels like I should know about it more. And that's how I met
Matt and Enos, the founders of Explosion, co-creators of Spacey. And then I was just
at a bar and, you know, the bar was packed. We were all like standing like this, side
by side, shoulder to shoulder. And we went to a new bar. And I went up to Enos and I
said, thank God, this bar is way more spacey. It's like really, really silly joke. Like
really, really silly joke. But they remember me because of that. And then, you know, the
day after we did some presentations and then Matt and Enos looked at me and said, oh, I
think that guy could YouTube well, because they were looking for a YouTuber to maybe
explain Spacey. And they thought, well, this Dutch guy seems funny. And I told them, like,
look, sounds cool. I've never done it before. You're going to have to coach me a little
bit, but sure. And then those videos became pretty popular. And that's kind of how I got
my first job at Rasa, which was this chatbot startup like from way before we did like LLMs,
basically. And I turned out to be pretty good on the YouTube thing and explainy thing and
made some packages and open source things there that kind of took off. And then at some
point Matt and Enos said, hey, we have funding now. Maybe it could be cool to join us. So
I joined them and then did cool things there. And they ran out of funding. So then I was
looking for something else to do. And then it turned out that Scikit-Lego was one of
the most popular Scikit-Learn plugins by then. And then the Scikit-Learn people who
started this company called Probable said, hey, Vizit, could you join us here maybe?
And then there I started doing a podcast for promotional reasons. And then it turned out
that there was this project called Marimo, which was pretty interesting. I interviewed
the founder because we had a podcast back, Probable, that I was hosting. And then it
turned out that the founder was from the same town that I lived in. So I lived in California
when I was 12. And he's also from Cupertino. He lived like two blocks away from me.
So we hit it off. And then he came to the conclusion that, oh, we also kind of need
DevRel at some point when we have funding. And that's again how I kind of switched.
It's just more coincidental than you might think. But it is conscious coincidental in the sense of,
oh, that sounds interesting. I'm consciously going to move in that direction.
But that's how this all happens.
Yeah, it's so interesting to hear it all snowball. And sort of like in the beginning,
you described that you were like punning about Spacey, but secretly,
unknown to you, were like actually interviewing a little bit.
I don't know if they were aware of it. But yes, I don't know if either of the parties
knew that they were interviewing. But I do. One bit of feedback that I have gotten quite a few
times is it is useful if you can leave a memorable impression, because then people remember you.
There's a lot of people on the planet. And a lot of people are easy to forget. But if for
some weird reason, you're kind of funny, then people remember you.
I was just saying to Vincent before the call that, you know, we met,
you know, one time at a conference in Budapest that I was where I was giving a talk. And I met
this Dutch guy who's really into open source. And I think you were still working for a software
consultancy around that time. And yeah, so but you left a good impression. So when then you popped up,
you popped up later, and I saw you went to do DevRel at Marimo. And so I was like, oh, yeah,
Vincent, you know, he's a memorable guy.
Yeah, I think I gave my somewhat famous Pokemon lightning talk at that event. Anyway,
it doesn't matter. But, but yeah, there is something to it. And like one other thing that I
do think, and this is like a hindsight explainer, like you look at your life, and then somebody
comes to a conclusion. One thing that in hindsight turned out to be like the best thing ever that I
did back in college, this is a really, really random thing. But I was a bartender at a comedy
theater in Amsterdam, like one of the like the oldest ones, like a really, really fancy one.
And all during college, during like, college season, like outside of the summer holiday,
I was just serving beer to like the most famous Dutch comedians, basically. And in the summer,
I would be a Dutch tour guide. So like people come to Amsterdam, you're a tour guide on the bike.
And I was kind of thinking like, gee, it's actually kind of perfect that I can like practice
my jokes that I kind of peek from the comedians, because then during summer, I just have a new
group of tourists every day that I can practice on basically. And that was also the way for me to
make it fun to do that gig. So I ended up doing that for like four years, basically.
And then you fast forward and like, you're the guy who's like really comfortable doing
conference talks. And you do kind of go like, okay, that's actually a skill you learned back
from your college days when you had that job, basically on the side. It's like one of these
little things. I also was like really into rowing. I did like semi professional rowing for a good
year, like little things like that do stack up if you just have a wide variety of like skills and
things you've done. And that's something I do think some people don't do. And there's a mistake
in that where I'm just going to double down on tech. And that's going to be the path forward.
I mean, it could work. But you're probably going to be more interesting if you do more
side activities. At least for me, I've noticed that, hey, yeah, in hindsight, that is actually
kind of the killer feature of my career at this point. I think the tour groups too is interesting
to hear where you just have the like repeated chance to like, it's, it's a lot like the format
that I guess comics use where they're like hitting open mics. You're just like taking
advantage of these groups. Well, I mean, like another aspect of the tourism thing is Amsterdam
has a pretty, pretty okay rich history, I suppose. It's also like interesting for that. Like you get
to hear all the stories, but the main thing you practice with that, by the way, it's not so much
jokes, it's storytelling. That's, that's the key thing. Cause you got to tell the story such that
the tourists don't get bored effectively because then you don't get tips. Yeah. Jeez. You actually,
it was like a high stakes. You had something riding on it. Uh, sweet tips. It is nice to know
that you're the guy who gets like the most tips from the entire group. Like that's a fun game to
play. Uh, when I, when I asked how you wound up in your current role, you said you were backpacking
through Latin America. Oh, right. Yeah. The story starts a bit more. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. I did say
that. Uh, so let's, let's go back even further. Um, so you got to imagine, um, my degree is in
econometrics and operations research. So very much applied math, but very little coding. Like
they didn't really teach me any coding whatsoever. Like they gave you a Java course and like a course
in Oxmetrics and like some other language no one writes in. Uh, but I had to teach myself Python
and R and JavaScript and all of those things. So, but I wasn't sure if that was going to be my
career because you're normally supposed to be like an actuarian or something like that, like
good money and all that. But Oh, well, I don't know, like data science might become a thing.
It was like around the time that was kind of new, but I had to figure out if like coding was
going to be a thing that I was going to do, if that was going to be a thing that I would, uh,
enjoy doing. And then I figured, you know, I do also want to go backpacking, but if I take some
work as an independent contractor with me, as I go to Buenos Aires and like Latin America up to
Peru and like all those nice places. Um, if I'm willing, if, if, if at some point it hits me that
I feel more like programming than to go clubbing every evening, then that'll be a signal that
it's such that I can say like, okay, Vincent, now you got to commit to this career path a bit.
Cause there's something about this that was just that, that really just tickles you. Uh,
and I just noticed as much as, um, you know, going out, uh, in Buenos Aires and all those
lovely places, as much as amazing as the cocktails in, uh, Lima in Peru really are.
I just noticed that at some point I just felt like coding a little bit more than going out every
evening. So that's where it started like that realization. Um, because then you kind of know,
like, okay, that I don't know where I'm going to end up, but I do at least have any experience
that really confirms a direction at least. Right. So that, that's where, in my mind,
at least the career really started. I love that you just stacked them against each other,
like head to head, uh, uh, who's going to win. I think it's like, or while I was backpacking,
it just became very clear. I don't know if I was that conscious about it upfront. Uh,
but at least in hindsight, this was the story I tell myself, I guess.
Yeah. It's so interesting, the whole path into tech and now you're at Marimo. Uh,
maybe, do you mind, maybe tell us a little bit about Marimo and how you got
involved there and, and what you're doing there.
So, the way this all started, you got to imagine I was back at Probable as the
company that's like a good chunk of the Scikit-learn core team is there, and I
was doing DevRel stuff.
And like, one of the things you can then do is you can say, let's look at all
these adjacent technologies and let's sort of try it out and like do it in a
live stream.
People find that interesting.
So, you know, Marimo was his new notebook thing.
I was just kind of curious.
And I tried it out on a live stream. Then afterwards, I also did the podcast,
got the founder on. And then I just played this game of like, okay,
do I find myself going back to Jupyter or do I find myself going to Marimo?
Because, you know, it's kind of up in the air. It's a new technology. It's kind of
kind of scary to invest in it, right? And then I just kind of noticed that Marimo started to
correct me. Because the thing that Marimo does that Jupyter doesn't is Marimo basically says
you can only define a variable once. There can be one cell where you define the variable,
and there's none of that stuff in Jupyter where you can say a is equal to one in one cell and
then a is equal to two in another cell. And depending on the order in which you run the
cells, the state and memory changes. Marimo doesn't allow for any of that. So in Marimo,
it's all very much reactive. You can define a variable somewhere. You can refer to it from
other cells. But the moment you define a variable twice, oh, we're going to throw errors in your
face because probably something is going wrong. And I just noticed during a live stream,
something totally went wrong in Jupyter that Marimo would have instantly fixed if I would
just have used Marimo. And that was the point in time where I kind of feel like, okay, it's got that
one feature where it's automatically correcting me. Oh, and it also has, because it's reactive,
like you change a variable in one cell, all the other cells that depend on that variable
automatically update. That is amazing if you want to do stuff with like widgets and really get the
browser into Python, that's also like a thing you can really do. Like, oh, hang on. I am rethinking
the way I want to work now. There's something here. I should chase this. That's the order of
things basically. And I can, we can give a more sort of formal definition of what Marimo actually
does, but that was the experience that got me towards the company. Yeah. Yeah. It's really
interesting here that it's like Marimo introduces like a constraint. Like it doesn't want you to
redefine a variable, but I love when it's like something constrains your behavior and it just
ends up really kind of like reshaping, providing like a lot of nice options as a result basically.
It's kind of like abstraction in general. That's the thing I just really dig.
Like at some point you just understand linear algebra or calculus or something like that.
And then, oh, you don't think about numbers anymore. You think about intervals and it's
a different thing. And you can, you can approach the topic differently.
I mean, after like, after the Jupyter notebook got really popular, I feel like there were a lot
of, a lot of people that, that were thinking about notebooks in terms of like that everyone's familiar
with spreadsheets and like the reactive model of spreadsheets. And so like trying to introduce
those ideas into the notebook medium in a way that, that made sense. And I think like certainly
an open source, like Marimo was the first, like, you know, there's some, yeah, there's, there's some
closed source, you know, you know, closed source notebooks that, that implement similar things,
but you gotta, you gotta pay for a product. But to have like that, that thing available in,
in, in open source is really exciting. And, and like what I always tell people about Marimo is
that it's, it's the fastest growing Python project. I think outside of UV, like maybe
there's some, maybe, maybe, maybe there's some, like maybe there's some AI, maybe there's some
AI projects that have become faster growing in the meantime. But if you look at like the,
you know, rapid star growth, like Marimo is just, you know, I think it, it, it reached like a hockey
stick growth pattern where I think, I think UV has got like 80,000 stars, but I don't know how many
Marimo has right now, but it's like, it was pretty breathtaking, rapid growth for a new project.
Yeah. I think we're around 20 K or something, but the, if we just look at downloads,
like that's the number that I typically look at.
Yeah. It's like a more real metric.
We grow about 5% a week.
That's pretty, that's pretty intense compounding.
That's it, it does get intense. Yes.
I wish my bank account grew at 5% a week.
That would be, that would be both amazing and scary, but the knob, like I'm also on the growth
side of things. I also, I do a little bit of engineering now and again, but like not in the
engineering team, definitely more on the growth team, but yeah, it's like, it's not every day
you're in a project that grows that fast. That is definitely yeah. I mean, Psychic Alert also
had that phase at some point where it just sort of grew exponentially, but now they've,
they're a bit more stable now, but to sort of be in there when the growth is actually happening
is definitely a fun rollercoaster.
I mean, I think what's interesting is that Marimo appeared and kind of co-developed with
modern AI and, and LLMs. And so I'm interested to like, he'll hear a little more from you on,
you know, like your perspective on like the role of, you know, AI and LLMs and, and notebooks.
And certainly like, I think it's, it's clearly taken an interest from the AI world. Like Marimo
got, got acquired by CoreWeave and it's just like a, you know, AI infrastructure company. And
so congratulations to the, to the team on, on, on that. But you know, so it's clear that like,
there's something going on with like the AI world. And so, but I haven't really thought too,
too much about, you know, the user interface layer and how that interacts with like how people,
you know, build, build AI models and do, do AI in 2026.
So one thing, I think the earliest AI feature that we had, and I could be wrong because these,
these were features that were kind of already there when I joined. But we had GitHub autocomplete
because that used to be free. It used to be an API for it. So that was a thing that was sort of
added in the front end quite early. We also had, I think right around the time when I joined this
thing in the sidebar where you could bring your own LLM API key. And then we could do this thing
where we contextualize everything that's in the notebook right now, have that be part of the
prompt. And then we have this thing on the side with a copy button that lets you copy code into
cells. And like, we had those features quite early. But then a few like kind of lucky breaks
just kind of happened. One thing that happened was that Dylan, one of the engineers in our team,
he just recognized that, Hey, maybe it's not just the LLM so much when cloud code happens,
maybe it's the harness that matters most. So we ended up making a linter just for Marimo.
And it was really not meant for humans. It was meant for the LLM. So the thing that we mentioned
earlier in Marimo, you have a cell, you cannot have the same variable that you declared in two
cells. That is one of the things that this linter will pick up and it will do so in a way such that
the text that comes out makes it very clear for the LLM how to fix it. So that's like a thing
that makes Marimo so much more useful when you're dealing with LLMs because it makes it very easy
for the LLM to just correct it. The other lucky break that we also kind of got is there's this
pretty popular IDE called Zed. I don't know if you've heard about it, but they invested a lot
in this ACP. I think it's called a protocol, but it's basically this way such that if you're an
agent like cloud code or whatnot, that you basically have a kind of a protocol that other
apps can plug into. So Zed kind of started with that. Just to round it out, ACP is agent client
protocol for anyone. Yes. Yes. So if you're, let's say a text editor, you don't have to do any nasty
terminal, read the text that comes out, buffer it back in. It's like an actual protocol that
cloud can understand and you can interface with it. And that's something we could basically just
piggyback off of. And that thing works very well. So one thing that you can do with an ACP like that,
and that's a trick that we like to use in Marimo, is let's say that you have a Polars pipeline or
a Pandas pipeline, but something where you start with a data frame and then you do like a step,
like we have logs from a server, we add sessions, and then we filter out the bots. And the thing
that comes out of that, we want to write some more Polars or SQL for, it would be amazing if
the LLM could just get the schema from that data frame, instead of having to try to figure out what
the columns are after six of these pipeline steps, so to say. So what you can do in Marimo
is you can tell the LLM at, and then pass in a variable, and then we can add context for that
variable that's in memory right now. And we can have different contexts if it's an integer,
and we can have different contexts if it's a data frame or a SQL table. And that also helps the LLM
immensely when it comes to writing proper pipelines. So there's all these lucky breaks
that we were able to just discover quite early. But also, to be quite honest, if I were Jupyter
right now, Jupyter is so used everywhere that they're also in a spot where they just can't
make sudden changes to the projects. That would be kind of dangerous, especially if you consider
Jupyter doesn't just do Python, by the way, it also wants to do R and Julia and lots of other
languages. It's pretty much language agnostic. And on the Marimo side, it's a whole bunch easier
because we just say, no, we only do Python. So there's reasons why we're also able to iterate
quickly. But yeah, we just had a couple of ecosystem lucky breaks, things that were just
working out very well for us. Also like UV, for example. UV added that pep576, I forget the number,
but the one where you can add the dependencies on top of the Python file.
For like UV run. Yeah. It's a miracle drug. It's a miracle drug. But here's the thing,
Marimo notebooks are Python files, so it works for us immediately for free. That's amazing. So
we can package our notebooks dependency free, basically, without the requirements of the txt
file. And we can do that because we made the choice to just be a Python file. And for Jupyter,
it's a different story because reasons. But yeah, we got a couple of good lucky breaks where we're
able to just integrate really quickly. But also we are a pretty small team. Engineers are super
solid. I think we make one release a week now, but it wasn't that long ago when we made three.
We're trying to be a bit more stable. I definitely tinkered a bit with the
agent client protocol stuff in Marimo. And I'm super excited. I mean, it seems like it's early
days and it's just rolling out. But I'm super excited to see it like integrated. And I feel
like it's going to be a real game changer. We support open code now as well. So open code has
that's this other key that they support all the open source models as well. So that was something
we could also just plug in quite easily. I will say like one thing that took me a little bit by
surprise, but it's something we're heavily investing in now is just skills in general.
So the idea there is that even if you don't want to use any of the AI stuff inside of Marimo,
what can we do to make cloud code or any of these command line tools as good as possible
just generate Marimo notebooks on the fly. And we're almost at the point where we can vibe code
in any widget just for one analysis. Like we're not quite there, but I do have a couple of these
examples where they just worked immediately like that. I mean, I've seen a ton of people,
like many people who aren't familiar with or never used Marimo before, like the dashboard mode is
like people are building like little apps. And it's because already people were using Jupyter
notebooks and like Jupyter widgets to build little dashboard like things, but to actually
have like you develop the app and then you can look at it in dashboard mode and you don't see
the code, you just see like the widgets, the widgets basically. So it's pretty cool. Speaking
of ACP, I just merged, just shipped, I guess, ACP support in my code review system RoboRev. So like
clearly it's gotten interest in the broader open source community. So like people are, you know,
whenever they encounter a new project, they're like, oh, can this project do ACP? And so it's
definitely very interesting. So on the topic of like widgets and stuff that you could do in
Marimo, I do want to have like one plug for my colleague, Trevor. There's a standard called
AnyWidget. I don't know if you've heard about it or seen it. It's getting more ubiquitous,
sort of thing I'm trying to do, but there is now a standard such that if you build a widget,
according to this one spec, it'll work in Jupyter, it'll work in Colab, VS code or Marimo, like all
the places basically. And the way like people are sitting on this thing and like sleeping on it,
people should definitely invest way more in it. There's this library that I've built where I just
make all these widgets for my analyses and I share them with people. People should really do more of
it. But the thing that I really love about those widgets in particular is that you can kind of
start imagining that we now can create these magic Lego bricks, if it were, such that you
can actually attach browser functionality to Python, which is something that used to be super
hard. I can now honestly make notebooks and let me use the game pad to run some Python scripts.
And for annotation reasons, for evals and stuff, there's good reasons why that makes a lot of
sense. But also webcams and also all sorts of other APIs that the browser has, you can just
attach that to Python now and you've got access to JavaScript and all the good things. So
One thing that I do try to remind people of is, it's not so much, yeah, we've got Marimo and that's
great, but it's like the entire ecosystem is way more modern than it was 10 years ago.
And that means that you should take a step back and just reflect on, hey, what's new?
Because you can rethink things definitely at this point. It's not just LLMs,
it's also the entire ecosystem has been made more modern, effectively.
Yeah, it's a good point too. If people are sleeping on any widget,
maybe worth noting too, that people like Plotly are using it.
Because I understand the adoption's pretty high across the ecosystem.
Altair also uses it now, I think. I've made this thing called Draw Data, where you get a 2D canvas
and you can just draw a dataset that you can then use, like draw and get something into Polars or
Pandas. So the sky really is the limit here. The most extreme thing that I've ever made,
this is a really, really nerdy, nerdy thing, but for the longest time of my life, I always
kind of understood differential equations, but nothing really clicked.
And then I saw this one YouTube video about this differential equation called Lanchester's Law,
which is about when two Age of Empires armies just smash into each other.
Apparently there's a differential equation such as you can predict how many,
blue army is slightly bigger than red army. Can we calculate how many blue army soldiers
survive is kind of the differential equation. And I thought, ah, it's so cool.
I wonder if I could vibe code in any widget that just simulates all those battles with JavaScript
because you can do sort of collision detection and stuff. And you totally can. So I built this
collision detection battle simulator in JavaScript with Claude, and that generates data for the
Python notebook to like check if the differential equation actually holds. And it does. And again,
part of it is the LLM. Yeah, sure. But like part of it is definitely the widget.
And you just couldn't imagine this two years ago, right?
Yeah. I almost wonder too, if it's worth, I don't know if this is zooming out or in, but like
almost just talking about the widget a little bit. Cause I think, I think the term widgets
so interesting and it like, I think a lot of people have some familiarity with working with
widgets, but I wonder if it's almost worth talking a bit about like, what is a widget to you and what,
what does it do so well, like for your workflow? So I kind of imagined this question might pop up.
So, and I think I've got like the perfect analogy. So I've got a kid now, right? And I want to have
a creative toy for my kids. So I could do two things. One thing I could do is I could buy a 3d
printer and then you can 3d print all sorts of interesting things. Or I could buy the kid Legos.
One of the crucial differences between the two is that if it turns out that the toy that I 3d
print, isn't exactly what my kid likes. The only thing to do is to start from scratch and 3d print
a new thing from the top, like whole again, basically. And if it didn't think about Legos,
like the kind of the magic thing is that you can always just click it in and click it out.
It's something that's really reusable in a lot of different ways. And if you have a very useful
widget, then there's more than one way to use it. So, okay. What kind of widgets will be widgets
then? Well, it'd be kind of like a map, like Google maps, kind of a thing inside of a Python
notebook and kind of do GeoJSON stuff maybe, or a drawing data thing that can have lots of
educational use cases for it. But the nice thing about a widget is that it's reusable in different
ways and that it can click with Python and all the Python data ecosystem tools. That's kind of
the way that I think about it. And if I think about vibe coding in particular, vibe coding to
me is a lot more like the 3d printer where you're going to 3d print the thing kind of from scratch
for like one specific purpose. But once you've got something done, it's not necessarily the case
that you can retrofit it to immediately attach into a Python notebook as well. Like that's not
the way that you would think about it. So widgets are like Legos. That's really the way that I like
to think about it. And I guess just to kind of finish out the last piece too, is like,
when do you see someone wanting to be in a notebook? Like you can have a widget in a notebook.
When do you kind of put yourself in the notebook with widgets versus kind of run,
like people could vibe code a react app. Do you have a sense for when they'd kind of want to be
in a notebook with a widget? To me, it's when the humans involved a little bit more. So like if you
have a, oh, people have to use the app and like the innards don't really matter. You know, the react
app thing sounds a bit more plausible. But when dealing with data, I mean, usually the whole
problem with data science is that you want to understand the story that's in the data set. And
if you understand it, then you can make better decisions. That's kind of the plan
that we have. But in order for you to understand the data, the human has to be involved somehow.
Like you have to be able to read a chart or like inspect or whatnot. So the whole point of these
widgets is to make that part easier. Again, it's a Lego brick that you can kind of click in such
that hopefully something becomes more interactive and analysis or whatnot. So the human can actually
kind of play around, swap things out. That's the game plan here. And like, I wouldn't do a data
analysis with a react app. I think I would still prefer to do that in a notebook because it's more
like a scratch pad. You don't know, like you have to be very flexible. That's why we like notebooks.
One of the, I mean, one of the big questions on my mind these days, and I'm obviously interested
in what you think about it, is that in a world where people essentially stop writing code and
they're just prompting, like what do you think, just looking at the current stack of tools,
like the widgets and, you know, the notebook. And I mean, I think it's good that Marimo was built
during, in this era already. So like, I assume that you've all been thinking hard about this,
but like, what do you think the average user workflow looks like in two years or three years
where like essentially nobody's writing any Python code anymore, but we still need to create these,
we still need to create these business artifacts that, you know, can be published,
whether it's like an interactive dashboard that's a bunch of Python code and analysis,
as well as some widgets that get published and displayed. And maybe the artifact is a Marimo
notebook. I don't know. But it's interesting that a lot of these tools were built for users who are
spending their day, like looking at code, thinking about code, writing code every day.
And then we're essentially speeding toward a world where like, you know, maybe people glance
at the code, but they're not really looking very hard. If anything, they're going to be asking like
agents to like check the code for them rather than looking at the edit themselves, which is
increasing what I'm doing. Like, I'm not writing code, but I'm asking agents to read the code for
me and make sure it and look for bugs and things like that. Yeah. So like, part of it is the
psychology of it. I feel like a little bit, right? Like, oh, we don't know. It feels kind of scary.
And the whole thing with Claude, at least to me, is sometimes there's a wave of like, oh my God,
it can do so much. But then there's a phase where I see it feel horribly that I kind of feel
grounded again. So there's that psychology of it is happening in the background as that's
happening in the back of my mind. I just want to be honest about it. I don't exactly know what's
going to happen, but if I think about my days in consulting, I'm like, what's the thing that
really went wrong most of the time? It's that people just didn't know what was in the data and
they were making all sorts of weird, like bad decisions because of it. And I don't know if
the LLM is going to do everything and if it's going to be more or less bad decisions, but something in
my mind is basically saying like, the magic of the notebook is it's also a nice way to debug.
There is something about, let's make a chart that should be a summary. And then just staring at the
chart for five minutes can immediately give you this, oh, hang on, that should not happen. Why is
that line going down in December? It should be going up. So it's a debugging thing. And in that
sense, you could argue all the code is not necessarily the most important thing. The most
important thing is the understanding. The notebook and the code are a tool in order to get
to the data understanding bits, so to say. So I don't know to what extent you need to properly
understand all of the code, but you do need to be able to sort of look at a chart and say, that's
bad. We have to dive in deeper. That I think is a skill that I don't see go away anytime soon.
The best example I have of this is in R, my favorite dataset, the Chickweight dataset,
just, Michael, is that a dataset that's kind of well known?
This is like, yeah, it's like it has two columns. It's built into R, is that?
No, no, no, no, no. So one column is the diet. The other column is the time. The other column
is the chicken. And the other column is the weight of the chicken.
Yeah, that's right. That's right.
So over time, you see all these chickens gaining weight. That's the whole idea. And you can train
machine learning models on it. You can predict, given this diet, given this time, how fat is the
chicken or how not fat is the chicken. You can make all sorts of models there. You could do
something very fancy with PyMC to do something Bayesian. It works magic on that dataset.
But there's one thing wrong if you're going to do modeling that way. And that is the fact that
some chickens actually die prematurely. And the only way that the model can be made aware of that
is if you, the human, are aware of that. Because if you're going to calculate some sort of regression
average on timestamp 10, how is the model going to be aware of the fact that some chickens died
at timestamp five for that specific diet? Well, we could have an LLM automate this.
But this is my main example of things will go wrong if you don't understand what's in the
dataset. And variants of this story happen all over the place. So for me, the notebook is basically
this environment where I can do my best to prevent stuff like that from going wrong.
It's one of Hadley's quotes that I remember. The cool thing about visualization is it doesn't
scale, but it can still surprise you. It's that surprising nature. It's basically this debugging
tool, but for numeric stuff. That's the way that I experienced it. And even if the code is going to
be maybe less valuable, the debugging numeric aspect of it definitely won't become less
important. So one thing I do a lot now is I try to just reproduce academic articles with
vibe coding. Here's an article, here's an LLM. I want to understand this article as quickly as
possible. And then the notebook again becomes this artifact where I can look at charts and I can try
to understand if I understand the technique of the paper, so to say. That's, in my mind,
the essence of what the notebook is all about. It's not so much about the code per se. It's more
this artifact that helps me think. Or reason, I guess, is the better word.
And if I'm understanding your paper example, it's like you're kind of trying to reproduce
a place where you can kind of tinker and double check and tweak.
I want to check if I understand the paper. And can I reproduce the experiment from scratch and
fiddle around and see where the limits are of the claim of the paper? That kind of stuff, yeah.
Yeah. Yeah, it's an interesting one. I don't know. Wes, what do you think?
Yeah, I'm definitely pretty AI-pilled these days. I feel definitely this sense,
especially for the data science ecosystem, I feel like data science is one of the domains where the
most judgment and nuance is present. It isn't like building a to-do list app. Doing data science is
not the same as building a CRUD app. And so the choice of models and the decisions involved,
there is a certain art and taste involved with choosing techniques and building a scientific
process that tries to eliminate your predispositions or biases about what you think
the analysis should, what results the analysis should have. And what I've been hearing from
people who are doing vibe-coded science is that essentially the models are
kind of tuning into what you're trying to prove or what you're trying to demonstrate.
And then they're subtly building data science that essentially tries to prove or fit itself
to the assertion that you're trying to make, which is essentially amplifying your personal bias.
I feel like this is exactly what we don't want. We don't want the LLMs essentially doing
sycophantic science. Like, oh, what are you trying to prove here? Let me come up with an analysis
that confirms your...
you know, it's like a more intense version of confirmation bias, which is a classic problem in
statistics and science in general. So, I don't know, like it's in, yeah, in this new world where
people don't want to, like, don't want to write code anymore. Like, I haven't written code in
months, and yet I'm building tons of software, but I'm doing software engineering, which is a
different, a different sort of thing. Like, I don't trust, I don't trust LLMs to add numbers,
but I trust them to write Go code or write Python code to write functions that add numbers,
and so it's a tricky, it's a tricky thing. You could argue though that, I'm assuming in
your case, you do, I mean, you've written pandas and a bunch of things, so you can tell yourself,
like, okay, I've got to taste, right? Like, there's, I need this to happen in a certain way,
otherwise it's BS. Like, you can make claims like that quite comfortably, I think, right?
As far as unit testing goes, there's like guardrails you can come up with, right?
Yeah, right, right, right. Yeah, but, but yeah, but if, if people are mainly interacting with
data science through, like, they aren't actually looking very closely at the code,
they're just looking at the charts and the tables that are being outputted. It's like,
and so the question is, can you effectively do data science by looking at the results? So,
it's like, you kind of, you do need to scrutinize the methodology, and so maybe you can have,
you know, agents in, explore and, and essentially create a visual explanation of what the
methodology is. Like, how, like, what, you know, what is the model architecture? Like,
what is the data pre-processing pipeline? What types of data transformations are being done?
Like, how are outliers in the data, like data trimming and normalization? Like, how is that
being done? And so perhaps, like, the solution will be to create a set of rules and best practices to
essentially a type of spec for, for data science. Because I think right now, like,
specs are all the rage for building software with LLMs. Like, you develop, you work with
agents to develop a spec, and then you do development, and periodically you, you do
spec conformance checks. Like, you ask agents to, adversarial agents, not the one writing the code,
but like, hey, another agent wrote this code, here's the spec for what the software is supposed
to do. Could you evaluate the work that's been done against the spec and let me know if it's,
if it's what I, it's what I asked for, what we, what we intended. And so maybe, maybe with,
with data science, like, having a, developing a set of prompts and processes where you're enabling
LLM-assisted data science, but you have, like, essentially a series of checks and,
checks and balances, basically, to avoid, try to mitigate the effects of confirmation bias and,
you know, the, the model kind of sycophantically trying to, you know, change the methodology such
that it produces your desired outcome, you know, cause it's trying just to make you happy, basically.
It's like, prove the thing that the agent, that the user asked for.
I mean, in my, in my mind, there's a couple of very human habits that I tend to rely on,
but I don't, it might also depend on the kind of work that I do and the kind of notebooks that I
write, but at least the thing that I taught myself, a chick weight example again, right?
If I've learned anything from the chick weight dataset is that if I make a chart, I need to
stop for five minutes and look at the damn thing. Cause otherwise you're not going to notice the
line that stops in the middle where a chicken might've died. Like that, that's kind of the lesson.
And that also means that if you're vibe coding, okay, one chart at a time, I need to stare at
the chart for a couple of minutes before I move on. I'm not going to, if I do serious work,
generate entire notebooks from scratch, because then you're not going to be part of the story of
what's happening there. And I don't know, like some of this does feel a little bit more like
an added human psychological attitude thing than necessarily a LLMs can correct each other.
Cause again, it's all about me trying to understand the story in the dataset.
And if I remove myself from that equation, I'm going to be in the world of hurt.
I need to be involved somehow. And maybe the solution then at least the most plausible one to
me is let's only generate three cells at a time, not, not any faster. And when you reach a milestone,
make sure you understand everything that's been happening and then you move on. And then
one really cute feature of Marimo is you can have a column or layout. So you can have,
this is column one, this column two. So you can have column one. And then
when we have a conclusion, move on to column two and organize your thoughts that way.
But to me, that's more of the way to go about it. At least in this phase,
like maybe the future is going to be different, but
for CRUD apps, again, it's a bit different because you know that you need a model view
and a controller and some CSS and stuff. So that you can kind of go, okay, boilerplate,
let's go generate the whole thing. But for a notebook, I think the approach of just taking
in a few cells at a time just might be the best remedy.
I think that resonates so hard. And I think just to like recap some of the things you've said,
I think it's, it's really relevant that you started with like Marimo brings a constraint
to users that you can't redefine a variable. And that constraint opens up a lot of really nice
behaviors in a way it's like psychological. I mean, it is a programming constraint,
but it is getting people to think in a different way. And it unlocks a lot of stuff.
I think to your point about this, like psychological question, you know, what,
what am I doing in the loop? And how am I approaching the problem? Like, I really feel
that like when I'm like vibe coding, when I'm heavily generating stuff, I do think there's like
this softening in my brain where I really am not attentive to a lot of things. And I could,
I could see the notebook, at least as like a theory, like being in a notebook three cells at
a time as a type of constraint on yourself to try to like put your attention on the right things
feels really like a really interesting approach. And one I'm pretty curious about as I like use
more AI and, and notice like where I put attention and where I don't.
I mean, I've reached a point with my agentic engineering essentially, where I, I'm not
reading any of the code. And so I, my, like my reaction to that was, well, if I don't read the
code, then I should have agents read the code for me and analyze the code. And so I built,
I built a system called RoboRev to be my like agentic pair programmer to make sure that like
all the code that's being generated out of the LLMs is being reviewed by an agent that didn't
generate it and maybe even multiple perspectives. And so sometimes they'll have both Gemini and
Codex review code that cloud generated and they'll find different bugs. And that's been
definitely helping, but I feel like at a certain point, we probably need like
essentially the, the equivalent of that, that type of like review, it's not a code review per se,
but it's more of like a methodological review of whether the data science being done makes sense.
Like, does the data visualization make sense? Is the modeling approach, does the modeling
approach make sense to essentially like, how can we avoid confirmation bias and like,
you know, the code generating agent, like sycophantically trying to generate an analysis
that is in tune with like what the data scientist is trying to demonstrate with their analysis.
And if we can recap Vincent's take, I almost think there are two very different takes on this, that
Wes is very AI focused, AI writes the code, AI reviews. Vincent, you mentioned like,
for some situations, exploring data, a sort of like notebook, a human in the loop approach.
I could definitely be on board with the whole, like, let's have the LLMs write the code if that
speeds things up. I think that could be like a perfectly defendable attitude. It's just that
I'm kind of selfish. I want to understand the data set myself. And if I'm being removed from
an equation, then I'm failing. Like, even with LLMs, I still want to be able to learn,
is kind of the attitude. And if it means that I don't have to do syntax, I think that can still
be fine. But then I want to understand, like, how do you do, I don't know, doing reinforcement
learning stuff with LLMs now. Like, what are good techniques to get your own LLM that does
like this very specific thing, is better at structured output for like very small LLMs,
let's say. Like, okay, what are the techniques that you could apply in order to get there?
Well, I don't want to, I mean, the LLM could maybe read a paper and implement something,
but then I want to understand the failure scenarios. And if, you know, I do want to learn,
and I don't know how useful the LLM is unless I'm able to learn along with it at this point.
That's kind of my attitude more.
Yeah, I think it's, we've been seeing like a bunch of articles, blog posts coming out about,
like, cognitive debt. Like, if the LLM does everything for you, like,
then you don't have any mental model of the code base for the problem. And like,
I think for some problems, that's fine. But the other problems, you're like,
oh, now I've got to this point where, like, it's catastrophically failed. And I've got, like,
like, I have never read this, looked at this code base before.
And now I've got to, like, build my way out from zero to that.
To some extent, right? To what extent this is really a new thing, because I remember back in
the day, what a lot of these data science people would do is they would just hit shift, enter in
a Jupyter notebook, run the whole thing. They would call fit predict a few times,
then they would say, look, number go up. Right? So to some extent, it's also not like a really,
really new thing that there's cognitive, like, that some people are quote, unquote,
a little bit lazy and sort of taking a step back and sort of saying, like, oh, it's great.
Everything's automated. I like to think, though, that one of the reasons why my career has
progressed is because at some point I took the effort to go just a little bit deeper,
such that I kind of knew more what was happening and could apply more tricks in practice.
And sure, some of that was syntax, but some of that was also just, okay, what am I actually doing?
Am I solving the right problem? And like that kind of a mental exercise. And again, like,
even if there's LLMs around, that mental exercise is still part of me. Like, I think there still
needs to be someone that understands the data set. One thing you said earlier, and I think you
mentioned like one soft skill underrated in data science is staring at a chart for five minutes.
For five minutes, no less. Yes. Five minutes. Yeah. Maybe that's a skill that as AI rolls out,
will be really hard to cultivate, like really important, especially important to cultivate.
Have you seen Bluff Bench, Vincent? That's something that Sarah and Simon put together
where like, it turns out that if you ask an LLM to like read a plot, it often just like reads the
access labels effectively, and then tells you a story about what it believes based on the
correlation of those two variables. So I think there's also like a lot of like this visual
intelligence that, you know, LLMs have yet to learn. Have you heard of the gorilla data set?
Oh, it's the best. This is the best. Okay. So there's a, I think it was in Italy. There's a
statistics class. They split up the group in half and like good students, they're equally
represented in both halves. One group gets a data set and says, here's a couple of hypotheses we
want you to check. The data set has body mass index, number of steps, and I believe male or
female. And they want to say things like, okay, do men have more steps? And like a couple of hypotheses
you got to check. The other group basically just got the data set and they kind of went,
do something with it. What's the story in this data set? If you were to plot the actual data
set, body mass index on the X axis and steps on the other axis, you would get like blue and red
colors for male and female. And it'd be a picture of a gorilla waving back at you. Now, one of these
two groups was more likely to discover this than the other one. Can you guess which one? It was the
one that was preoccupied with the hypothesis checks that didn't bother making the plot.
So I thought as a cute exercise, it was like a year, a year and a half ago, I get this chat GPT
analysis bot things. I figured, Hey, let's give that, let's give the data set to this bot, see
what it makes of it. It completely failed. I made a YouTube video of it. It was just super
interesting. They're, they're really bad at charts, but again, the thing that I think humans are also
pretty bad at charts. If they don't take five minutes, if you just glance at it and call it a
day, there's a lot of stuff you can glance. That's cool. But there's usually like, Hey,
why does the line go down there? That should never happen.
I can't even get people to read blog posts these days, you know.
Every time I send people, like, hey, I enjoyed this blog post, read this blog post, they're like, read.
I mean, I gotta say, you've been writing a bunch of it. I've been reading your stuff recently more, I gotta say, Wes.
So, like, you're definitely doing the good work.
But I've also noticed, like, there's like these explainer blog posts that just get crickets these days.
Because why read a blog post when you can ask an LLM just in time? There's a little bit of that happening.
But I gotta take the moment, and I'm sorry for the listeners, you gotta imagine Hadley came in late.
So, like, now that he's in here, I get to ask the question to him again.
Hadley, do you know the ChickWeight dataset in R?
Okay, okay, then I'm gonna check if you actually understand what's wrong with it.
Because it was my favorite dataset that I used whenever I did an R course or a Pandas course, even.
Can you tell me what is wrong with the ChickWeight dataset?
Have you used it in a class or in a training or anything?
That brings back vague memories.
It's like something is switched, like the experimental condition is switched or some of the chick labeling.
Some of the chickens die prematurely.
That's the story of that one.
And that's in a specific diet that they die prematurely.
So, if you're gonna predict the weight at time step, like, 20, chickens would have died at that time step.
So, the model has no way of knowing, unless you as a human were to model that that way.
And that's kind of my main go-to as far as you have to understand the dataset.
Otherwise, stuff will go wrong in production, even when numbers go up.
I didn't know about the dataset, at least.
I'm assuming Michael and Wes did not.
I tried to guess what it was and I failed miserably.
So, I feel like...
One thing I do think is super interesting is just, if you have an interesting question and you need an answer to it.
I think back in the day, if I had two afternoons with a person and you knew a bit of Excel, I could teach you a bit of R.
And you would be very productive.
That was one of the really cool things about the tidyverse stack and all that stuff.
For Python, it was not necessarily two days.
I needed a bit longer.
But you can definitely get it down to one day with an L.
And something about that is super duper exciting.
But I am hoping that people who are gonna go walk that path, that they are gonna use some sort of a harness or guardrail.
Make lots of plots and do that kind of behavior to make sure they don't do it wrong.
Yeah.
Yeah, do you...
I'm so curious if y'all have advice for...
I actually just talked to a person who's planning, like, curriculum for high school students who are learning...
They were gonna learn, like, Python and to deploy web apps and things like that.
And I think originally they were gonna do a lot of, like, teaching.
Like, building up what they need to know.
And now they're trying to figure out, like, to what degree should we pull AI in really early?
And get you, say, like, deploying something first.
They're asking, like, how should we sequence the instruction?
Do you have thoughts on that?
I think, like, half a year ago, I basically gave myself permission.
Like, okay, let's see if you can actually vibe code two apps from scratch.
You're not gonna look at the code whatsoever.
See what happens.
And then eventually I did start looking at the code.
But two things happened.
First thing that happened was I was using Flask.
And there was no CSRF protection anywhere.
It does kind of feel like you should at least manually do the exercise of what could go wrong if you don't add that.
Like, there's something about reading from...
There's something about, like, book smarts.
You read from a book.
And there's something about street smarts.
Like, oh, I've actually pwned someone's server because there was no CSRF protection on the thing.
Right?
And I don't know.
Like, something...
I do think, like, that sniff test, something about that.
It's kind of like doing a physics experiment.
Something with the Bunsen burner and the professor making something explode is making it stick way more in your mind.
Again, something about the story.
And just reading it from, like, a text that goes by so fast.
Like, an LLM can barf paragraphs.
Right?
I fear that you're just not gonna...
It's not gonna be in your noggin as much.
So one thing I think could be cool is that you could say, like, okay, kids.
We're all gonna build a web app now.
We're gonna totally vibe code it.
Then we're gonna see if we can break it.
And, you know, that that might be the classroom activity.
But you're also confronted with, like, the unhappy path, maybe.
Something like that.
The other thing that went wrong, by the way, with the LLM doing the vibe coding thingy is I told it to make a make file and to, like, test stuff.
And there was, like, a production database.
But every time that I would do unit testing, it would flush the production database.
Because it forgot to set this one environment variable to only use a local SQLite thing as opposed to the thing in production.
So my flashcards kept getting removed.
Again, I do think if you hit your head, and that's part of the curriculum, that could definitely be useful.
Right?
But I don't know.
If you're reading about an environment variable and going through the pain and knowing how things can go wrong.
How do you get people to be good at correcting the LLM if you've never done a correction on yourself before?
That's the tricky bit, I think.
Because that's the skill we're gonna care about.
Like, writing the code is becoming less valuable.
But being able to check the code or being able to improve a code base by glancing at it.
That's a more impressive skill these days.
But how do you train that without the aforementioned part?
I think right now we're seeing this rapid adoption of coding agents.
And everyone's using Cloud Code and Gemini and OpenCode and all the things.
But I've noticed that a lot of people are essentially putting their minds to sleep a little bit.
And that they feel like the agent knows what it's doing and is looking out for doing things the right way.
The more you use these things, you observe over and over that they have egregious blind spots.
And they forget to do things.
They will blow away a production database by accident.
And so I feel like probably at some point in the future, maybe there'll be some evolved version of coding agents.
Where there's an agentic supervisor in the loop that's applying software engineering best practices.
And security guidelines and all those things.
But I think right now it's a little bit of a do-it-yourself affair.
Either you create a process where you essentially apply this supervision.
Where either you're the supervisor, which is more or less the best case scenario.
Is that you're the supervisor and you actually know what questions to ask.
How to correct the LLM and tell it, oh you forgot to...
You're putting the production database in the same place as the application deployment.
You're going to destroy that with your next rsync.
Don't do that.
I actually had that happen to me by the way.
Unfortunately it was data that didn't really matter.
Where I was like, did you just destroy my production database with that rsync?
Yeah you did. You didn't think twice about doing it either.
Did you just rmrf that directory?
That had important stuff in it.
And so there's a lack of guardrails right now.
And supervision.
And so that's probably why we're seeing disproportionate benefit to coding agents.
To really experienced people.
Because they're able to leverage their pre-existing skills.
And bring their judgment and ability to recognize when the agents are going off the rails.
And if you don't have that experience or the ability to recognize.
Oh no, press escape, you're doing the wrong thing.
You've gone off the rails.
Then for a lot of people they're just going to be in a world of pain.
I think for, all this is reminding me.
For a web app you could maybe come up with a really constrained web framework.
Where there's only one way to deploy this thing.
And that's the full proof LLM proof.
Because it's a CRUD app you can really constrain it.
For data science though.
The whole point is that you are able to be creative I think.
Like mixing matching tools in ways that wasn't sort of.
Weirdest trick that works in data science.
Weirdest trick.
Back when I was at Probable.
I was able to, I figured out a way to get logistic regression to beat XGBoost.
The way that I did that is you got to imagine there's a data set with cars.
So year that it was built, color, brand.
That kind of data set.
And then price.
I want to predict the price.
Second hand car.
So okay.
What you could do is you could sort of say let's do one hot encoding.
So like car brands like one, lots of zeros.
And like colors like lots of zeros.
And one somewhere, one hot encoded.
And then what you can do is you could sort of try and do a distance.
Between two different encodings of these cars.
But the problem is.
How are you going to compare two colors?
That distance is always going to be one basically.
Because it's a different color.
Okay.
How are you going to do a similarity lookup?
What you could do is you could have like a regression model.
So you're going to take your encoding.
And then you're going to train towards the price variable.
Oh and that means that you have a coefficient for every single variable.
Which includes like the one that was for a specific car brand.
Let's say.
Oh actually that can be an embedding technique now.
You can take your linear model.
And then we can use those coefficients.
Multiply that by the original array.
Oh and if you then want to do a k nearest neighbor kind of a thing.
Then you now have a system that gets like a distribution of prices.
Based on similar cars as well.
And similarity now is not just how similar are the properties.
But also how does that relate to the price.
And it turned out that if you build a system that way.
That you actually got better predictions than XGBoost.
And you also got like an uncertainty bound around that as well.
Okay.
I like this freedom.
Like this is something that no textbook will tell you.
But if you start thinking about the problem a bit more and more.
Then you can come up with these super duper creative solutions.
And that's also kind of feedback I do want to give to people.
Because people have always been asking me.
Like Vincent what book do you read to come up with these techniques?
And I think the whole point is that I don't.
Like I just take a step back.
I take pen and paper.
I have a coffee.
And I think about the problem.
Far away from social media and distractions.
And I give myself permission to let my mind free.
And it's a little bit easier now that I've got a kid actually.
Because he really gets me right from the laptop.
He really wants to go to the playground.
But that's how you do it.
And again, but the problem though is like if you want to then have LLMs help you.
And LLMs are super powerful.
It is very tempting to be intellectually lazy.
And that's when you should kind of resist.
And maybe like this was a tweet from Andrej Karpathy.
Like I think a couple of years ago.
Maybe if learning feels a bit painful.
Maybe that's a good thing.
Because it means that you're doing something that's uncomfortable.
And you're doing something that's a little bit unknown.
And if you look back at your week.
And you kind of go like this entire week was easy peasy.
Maybe you should start getting worried.
I think that's maybe a way to think about it.
Because then maybe you should invest in a new hobby.
And learn a new skill maybe that way.
Maybe I'm doing calculus again just for the fun of it.
Also for the puzzling.
Part of the whole point of learning is like mental.
It's like mental exercise.
Like I did pure math as an undergrad.
And so I spent a lot of time like doing you know analysis.
And topology and abstract algebra.
And things like that.
I think like you know.
Certainly like I don't apply any of those skills now.
Like was it useful to learn Galois theory?
Like I did.
But I've forgotten all of it.
But I do think that like mental stretching.
And like racking your brain really hard.
To think about difficult theoretical problems.
And being able to reason about like these abstract structures in your mind.
Like it does you know.
Again, I don't know how I would have turned out if I hadn't done theoretical math,
but I would like to believe that it had some practical benefit in my current existence where
I'm basically doing software engineering and not doing any pen and paper math.
So I did operations research, so definitely a different field of math, but the thing with
operations research is you've got to prove that your mathematical allocation is optimal.
If it's not optimal, you can't prove it, it's wrong, basically. It's a thing that the professor
really hard drilled into me. And something about that is a critical attitude. Like,
I'm not going to believe anything anyone says, I want to see the full proof.
And maybe it's not so much the theory, but more the attitude that comes with the science,
I like to think, that also makes you good at debugging.
Hypothesizing a bit, but I can definitely imagine, Wes, that that's a thing that's still stuck with you.
This kind of reminds me of the paper, or at least the title of the paper. It's called Better To Be Frustrated Than To Be Bored,
about effective states students might have, and which ones are better for learning.
And I do think what you described is, you know, like writing it out isn't necessarily boredom, but like frustration,
or kind of responding to something and wanting to prove something or lock it down. That does strike me as kind of a key.
I have a kid now, so I can tell you this story. My theory right now is kids learn to speak because they're frustrated,
because they have an idea in their mind they can't tell their parents. And there's this god-awful phase with a lot of screaming in the household.
When the kid is making it absolutely sure that something is highly amiss, but eventually the kid learns,
oh, I got to learn the language, and that's how I can properly communicate to my parents.
There's a little frustration thing there that I do think is key.
Hadley, bringing it back to you. I know you've brought up things like I've seen, I think, in the Posit Slack.
I think you shared out an article that mentions you wouldn't bring a forklift to the gym.
I'm curious your thoughts on this topic of people putting in effort and learning. How do you see it?
I think the one thing that's really interesting is many of us now have the opportunity to automate parts of our job that we love doing.
You can automate that, and you can find joy in different parts of your job, but you also don't necessarily have to.
You still can keep doing those bits. Maybe not all the time, but tactically.
You don't have to just optimize for velocity all the time.
But then the other thing I think about is why does anyone learn to play a musical instrument?
You can find someone on YouTube or Spotify or Apple Music doing a way better job of playing any music than you.
There's also some of these skills we gain joy from, regardless of whether we're the best at the world or not.
And I think some of that, how do we teach this stuff?
Coming back to when you do math in high school, most of that you're never going to use.
But you're training your brain in this cool problem-solving way that you can get a lot of enjoyment from, independent of the strict utility.
And again, if I can come back to a notebook.
One thing I really like about notebooks, it is a nice place where you can put your thoughts as well.
There's something about a notebook that is able to do that way more than a code base.
As an artifact, so to say.
It definitely does feel a little bit more like a thing you would write down in your own little diary,
as opposed to a theoretical book in the closet somewhere.
It can still be very personal.
And you can also just research something that you're interested in, as opposed to something for your work.
I will say, with LLMs though, this is a habit.
Even if I generate notebooks from scratch and I try to go super big and stuff,
you can still vibe code defensively, if that makes sense, in a notebook.
I have a video on this on the Marimo channel, if people are interested.
But one thing I really love to do now is, if I make charts,
the use case here is, I wanted to find out if buying a bread machine was going to save the family money.
It's a really silly use case.
But you can imagine there's this one line going up that says,
how much money do I spend going to the bakery?
And there's this other line going up that's a little bit more flat that says,
I only pay for the ingredients and I have this upfront cost of the bread maker.
And those two lines intersect somewhere.
Except I'm a Bayesian, so it's not a break-even point.
It's a break-even distribution because both lines, they wiggle around a bit.
There's a bit of uncertainty.
We got to take that into account as well, right?
So I was interested in the break-even point distribution.
But one thing I explicitly told Claude to do, and I did it wrong a few times,
and I kept hammering on it.
Those two charts need to have the same x-axis and they have to be on top of each other.
Because otherwise, I cannot mix.
Otherwise, I cannot glance at both distributions at the same time.
And when Claude was done, I noticed that it was way off
because the distribution at the bottom did not fit the chart on top.
You can just sort of draw straight lines.
You can see it was really wrong.
But the only reason I was able to find that bug
was because I was coding defensively, quote-unquote.
Those two charts have to be under each other.
And there have to be all sorts of sliders,
so I can also wiggle around to check my intuition.
But I am very conscious of the fact that I have to sort of
code defensively in a notebook these days,
especially if I go for more than two cells that Claude can just go ahead and rip.
And that's also, again, still a bit of a mental exercise.
You got to think about that upfront.
If you're not doing the syntax,
oh, how am I going to model this?
What do I care about figuring that out?
Yeah.
Don't skip that.
I think the visualization is super interesting, though,
because I think that's a completely different lens to look at your effort.
And whenever you look at things through a different lens,
you're more likely to find problems.
And I've been kind of sort of wondering about that
in the era of reviewing LLM-generated code.
Sure, you probably don't want to read every single line of code the LLM has written.
That's not super valuable.
But it feels like tools to be like,
okay, let's change the code set this way.
There's now a new big blob of code here.
So you can be like, well, actually, kind of structurally,
that doesn't feel right to me.
I expected the blob to be over here or to be spread out this way.
So it feels like, I don't know,
maybe there's a scope for kind of cool new visualization tools
to help us understand what LLM is doing to our code.
In the same way that looking at pictures of data is so useful
if we can figure out new abstractions for visualizing code
so we can better understand what was the big picture implication of this change.
Another sort of just mental exercise that I do recommend people do,
and this is like an old school thing people never really did.
You know how you win a Kaggle competition?
By checking the training data set
to see if there's any mislabeled items in there.
It's a little thing that tends to go wrong.
There's a lot of Kaggle competitions with bad labels.
And again, like, how do you find out?
Well, just look at the data set for a bit.
And it's one of these steps that people sometimes miss.
And visualizations can make that a whole lot simpler.
Maybe you do something with an embedding,
and then the sentiment curves,
and there's all sorts of fun stuff you can do.
But again, there's all these exercises that
if you go just a little bit slower,
you can just give yourself permission to like,
just do this one little check.
And oh boy, does that really help you understand stuff as well.
And again, human in the loop.
Even if you're a business that like,
there's this dream that you can have like
the one man billionaire startup with LLMs now and stuff, right?
But something is telling me if you're the one man
and the LLM does everything,
and you have no idea what the LLM is doing,
like, really?
One billion company?
Is that the, really?
I don't know.
There's still something about like,
there's gotta be some human around
that still understands what's happening.
I think that's still kind of fine.
The joke I always make is natural intelligence
is also still a pretty good idea.
Yeah.
Wes, do you,
I feel like there was a response,
kind of a reaction from you.
Do you think a person will
vibe code a billion dollar company?
If they don't get too distracted
by shiny objects along the way,
that seems to be the thing that's,
the thing that's happening.
I mean, I've been observing things like Gastown
and things from the Steve Yegi-verse.
And honestly, my reaction,
and this is a little bit of a hot take,
is like,
I'm like,
are any of these people building anything useful?
show me something that I can use that's useful.
I can't,
I'm not,
I mean, I see that there's a lot of work being done.
A lot of tokens are being burned,
but I'm not seeing the useful output.
I wrote a blog post called
The Mythical Agent Month
that's been circulating.
And that came out a couple of weeks ago.
And the idea,
yeah,
and so the idea is that,
that,
you know,
this,
the Mythical Man Month is a book that came out in 1975.
So over 50 years ago.
And obviously software engineering and computers
and the whole,
the internet is,
a lot of stuff has happened in the last 50 years.
But Fred Brooks wrote a bunch of claims,
you know,
essentially the core idea is that
when you add people to a project,
to a late project,
it will become later.
And that the larger a team is,
the more communication overhead,
coordination overhead you have.
And so essentially now with,
with agents doing the development,
more or less,
you have like an agentic version of the Mythical Man Month,
where,
you know,
essentially like you were the chief surgeon.
And so you have to have this conceptual model of how the system works
and what the agents are supposed to do.
But you also have to review and supervise their work
and make sure they're doing the right thing.
And they aren't creating giant messes for each other to clean up.
And so,
for what I'm seeing is that people are creating these,
like half million line,
you know,
million line software projects,
but they're just gigantic hairballs that are like,
at the end of the day,
like,
you know,
this could have been 50,000 lines of code and a great deal,
simpler resource,
less,
you know,
more resource efficient,
like in a lot more,
a lot more useful and without lots of like unnecessary features,
because there's nobody to say,
no,
you can add a hundred additional features.
Like every day you wake up and over your morning coffee,
you're like,
oh,
can you add these five new features that I had?
I thought of,
you know,
a hundred more.
And the agent's never going to say no.
And the agents won't refactor the code and make the code cleaner.
Unless you,
unless you tell them to.
And so it's,
it's essentially like.
Now like your human,
like your judgment and your taste as a designer of these software systems
has become the most single,
most important skill and you're in your tool belt.
And unless you are extremely judicious about what you build and what you
don't build and how you proactively hold the agents accountable to build in
accordance with your vision.
And to not,
if they create messes that you spot the messes and you clean them up.
But essentially like it's created a new type of industrial process for,
for building software.
And there's a lot of people that are just kind of Yoloing it with their
agent sessions and going in and essentially they're asking a thousand prompts
in a row,
like requesting one feature after another and they're spotting bugs and asking
the agents to fix them.
But with little regard for the types of code bases that they're,
that they're generating.
And I think people who are engaging in that motor are in for a world of pain
at some point in the future when they hit the inevitable scalability wall,
when the performance of their agents like stops,
stops being good.
And like every time they touch any file,
they're like,
Oh my God,
my context,
it,
the pain,
it burns.
So yeah,
it's,
it's a lot of pills from anthropic and open AI to like make this pain go away
and to like bring agentic supervisors like auto,
auto software engineering,
you know,
auto data science so that like,
you can just ask for what you want and like let the software process be
conducted by,
you know,
an agent swarm or whatever they're calling it these days.
But it's not,
it's not quite there yet.
But it's also,
I mean,
if I think about psychic Lego,
right,
there's a thing that I made and I,
and I guess,
sure,
I made psychic Lego.
That could have been vibe coded immediately.
We didn't need Vincent to write that stuff on his laptop.
We couldn't,
we could have,
we could have done it way more efficiently.
Okay,
great.
The reason why psychic Lego is popular is because I went on stage at a
couple of events and started talking about it and started spreading the
message and maybe just taking a step back.
The code is not all of it. It's also like, can you do the marketing around it?
It's also about, can I demonstrate to other people that I've got taste? And can I convince
them that even if I'm vibe coding, you are going to get value out of it if you use my thing, as
opposed to some other dude who is also vibe coding, but maybe just wants to yell at it?
People sometimes forget about there's a marketing aspect of it. And that's also a constraint.
The how fast can you convince people that your thing is good? Maybe that's more the constraint.
And also why I figured going into DevRel is actually a super useful skill. Then, oh, can we
code it? Yeah, I completely agree. If I put out something, even if I built it with agents, or
highly put something out built with agents, people are probably more likely to, maybe more likely to
take it seriously, because they'll say, oh, well, these are people that built things that
weren't Slop in the past. I've put a couple things on GitHub that I would describe as AI Slop.
It's my Slop. It works. But most of the projects I'm building are deliberately not Slop. I don't
want to be known as a purveyor of AI Slop on the internet. That's not very brand aligned.
I will say that on the topic of, okay, is there something more awesome now with these LLMs?
There's this feeling that people miss that. What's the better app that we didn't have before?
In my mind, and we've mentioned it before in this episode, there is this one exception that
stands above everything. It's like the giant pillar, and that's widgets. You can't actually
comfortably say for this one analysis, I need this one widget now. You download the Marimo
skills that we've got, and you can just generate the widget on the fly. There's this one math
challenge with Unveritasium. I'll send you a link. But the whole math problem becomes a whole
lot simpler if you can just have the D3 graph chart appear. That was done in five minutes with
Claude, and it's part of the notebook, and it becomes so much easier to understand this one
math problem. I like Tectonic and Suguru. Those are like Sudoku kinds of puzzles. Oh, I have a
widget now that lets me generate them on the fly and then have all sorts of... The fact that that's
normal is just such a creative freedom. And I will say that was just not imaginable a few years
ago, but that is something that is just... People are sleeping on this, for God's sakes. I still
don't get why I'm the only guy so excited about these widgets, but there's so much intellectual
freedom to gain here. I love that it all comes back to widgets. We started at widgets,
and yeah. Honestly, we've covered so much incredible stuff, and I feel like I've just
got so much to think about. I feel existential about my role in the loop
in coding, but now I also feel like we've learned so much about notebooks and widgets.
I really appreciate your approach of wanting to look at charts and to think deeply about the
problems and actually be sure that you're learning and processing problems as you go.
And I definitely think for listeners, the idea of Marimo and trying life three cells at a time,
even if you're working with Claude, trying this exercise of being in a notebook, building things
gradually as an exercise seems super powerful. And I don't doubt that widgets also have a huge
role in that as an output that you can sort of manipulate or interact with.
It makes my thought a bit more interactive, and there are some things where a static chart is
just fine, but there are also these moments where that interaction is able to surprise
me in a different way than just a static chart on its own isn't able to. I forget, there was
this thing in R, this is super long ago, Hadley. There was ggplot, and then we had this thing that
you were building on top of ggplot. Ggvis?
Yeah, wasn't that like the interactive canvas thing that you were building on top of dplyr
like 10 years ago-ish? Yeah, it was like ggvis.
ggobi was kind of another super interactive thing and a different.
So that was actually in my mind a couple of weeks ago. We now have like that,
the ability to actually select points in a matplotlib chart now.
Oh yeah, I saw that. Yeah, brushing. Yeah.
And that's like another one of these examples where, oh, that just opens up so many things
that you can play with now, just having a few widgets like that.
Yeah, that's wild. Yeah, Vincent, thanks so much for coming onto the test set. I'm also
going to flag, you mentioned the Gorilla dataset. So for people listening, I think I found your
article OpenAI versus the Gorilla dataset. So definitely recommend people check it out.
And I guess like the only thing that the people listening, check out any widget and know that
on the Marimo, there's a Marimo skills repository. You download that and then Cloud Code can
generate these things on the fly for your Marimo notebook. Give that thing a spin.
And have Trevor Mance on the show. He's the guy that made it. He's a colleague of mine.
I'm a big Trevor fan, so I feel like it's inevitable.
Same. I think I'm on record, like besides Trevor, I'm the guy who made the most widgets
and I might have beaten Trevor at this point. That's a sweet spot to hold, I feel like.
It is. If people are interested in widgets, by the way, there's a library called Wiggly Stuff
that has about 48 widgets at this point, I think, that people can directly use.
Yeah. Nice. Awesome. Well, thanks. Yeah. Thank you so much for coming on. I know it's like late in
the Netherlands, so appreciate you burning the midnight oil for us.
My pleasure. It's fun to hang out with you folks.
Yeah. We'll see you on the internet.
Thanks for coming on. I appreciate it.
Thanks for having me.